---
title: "Building a chmod calculator in Go"
date: 2020-09-17T21:08:28-04:00
draft: true
---

One of the things that really irked me as I started to learn more about Linux was using the `chmod` command.

When I first learned the `chmod` command in school, we learned to explicity declare the permissions:

```sh
$ chmod a+x file.txt
```

However, whenever running through tutorials or, really, anything that involved `chmod`, I found that most people like to use the numeric (octal) format instead:

```sh
$ chmod 777 file.txt
```

Later on (like - really later on - like this year) I discovered that passing `-v`, or `--verbose` would show what the explicit permissions are.

```sh
$ chmod -v 555 file.txt
mode of 'file.txt' changed from 0777 (rwxrwxrwx) to 0555 (r-xr-xr-x)
```

But this summer I decided to try learning Go, so I figured it would be fun to try writing a `chmod` calculator in Go. 

# Understanding Unix permissions[^1]

[^1]: Julia Evans also has [an amazing zine about Unix permissions](https://twitter.com/b0rk/status/982641594305273856?lang=en).

File permissions can be represented using 9 characters. For example:

```
r-x---rwx
```

In the above example, the user (owner) may read and execute the file, and the group cannot read/write/execute the file, and others may read, write, *and* execute the file.

The string is implicitly split into 3 sections (each with 3 characters): user, group, and others. The `user` is the owner of the file; the `group` is the group the file is assigned to; `others` are users that fall into neither of these categories.

The characters in each section therefore represent the actions that can be taken: the `r` indicates read; the `w` write; the `x` execute. There are also the `setguid`/`setuid`/`sticky` actions; however, I'm not going to go into those for now.

# Converting permissions to numbers

Taking this idea of 9-character permissions, we can think of each character as a flag. Since there are only two possibilities for each character in a given position, we can represent it in binary.

For example:

```go
perms := rwxr-xr-x
binary := 111101101
```

For each disallowed action (indicated by the `-` character), we can set it as a `0` in binary. Otherwise, we can set a `1`.




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chmod#Numerical_permissions
